WebSocket broadcast / channels (#1587)
litestar-org/litestar: docs/usage/channels.rst

.. currentmodule:: litestar.channels

Channels
========

**Channels** are a group of related functionalities, built to facilitate the routing
of event streams, which for example can be used to broadcast messages to WebSocket
clients.

Channels provide:

1. Independent :term:`broker` backends, optionally handling inter-process communication

>    and data persistence on demand

Reviewer: This looks like it's cut off mid sentence

Author: That's because it's not a full sentence. It's a continuation of the "Channels provide" frament, which is continued in the other list items. That's also why there should be no periods at the end. 

This applies to the rest of the document as well.

> 2. "Channel" based subscription management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. "Channel" based subscription management.
```

3. Subscriber objects as an abstraction over an individualized :term:`event stream`,

>    providing background workers and managed subscriptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   providing background workers and managed subscriptions.
```

> 4. Synchronous and asynchronous data publishing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Synchronous and asynchronous data publishing.
```

> 5. Optional history management on a per-channel basis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Optional history management on a per-channel basis.
```

6. :doc:`WebSocket </usage/websockets>` integration, generating WebSocket route
   handlers for an application, to handle the subscription and publishing of incoming

>    events to the connected client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   events to the connected client.
```

Also, maybe break this point into two sentences, it's a bit long.

Basic concepts
--------------

Utilizing channels involves a few moving parts, of which the most important ones are:

.. glossary::

    event

>         A single piece of data published to, or received from a :term:`backend`, bound

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        A single piece of data published to, or received from a :term:`backend` bound
```

>         to the channel it was originally published to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        to the channel it was originally published to.
```

This sentence is a bit elliptical

    event stream
        A stream of :term:`events <event>`, consisting of events from all the channels a

>         :term:`Subscriber` has previously subscribed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        :term:`Subscriber` has previously subscribed to.
```

    subscriber
        A :class:`Subscriber <.subscriber.Subscriber>`: An object wrapping an

>         :term:`event stream` and providing access to it through various methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        :term:`event stream` and providing easy access to it through various methods.
```

    backend
        A :class:`ChannelsBackend <.backends.base.ChannelsBackend>`. This object
        manages communication between the plugin and the :term:`broker`, publishing
        messages to and receiving messages from it. Each plugin instance is associated

>         with exactly one backend.

Reviewer: Make this a note?

    broker
        Responsible for receiving and publishing messages to all connected
        :term:`backends <backend>`; All backends sharing the same broker will have
        access to the same messages, allowing for inter-process communication. This is
        typically handled by a separate entity like `Redis <https://redis.io/>`_

    plugin

>         The :class:`ChannelsPlugin <.plugin.ChannelsPlugin>`, a central instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The :class:`ChannelsPlugin <.plugin.ChannelsPlugin>`, which is a central instance
```

>         managing :term:`subscribers <subscriber>`, reading messages from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        managing :term:`subscribers <subscriber>`; reading messages from the
```

Author: This changes the meaning and makes it incorrect. It's a list of different functionalities, the latter items of which are not directly related to the management of subscribers.

>         :term:`backend`, putting them in the appropriate :term:`event stream` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        :term:`backend`; putting them in the appropriate :term:`event stream` and
```

>         publishing data to the backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        publishing data to the backend.
```

This entire point needs some attention. It's a bit complex and condensed

Author: Well, it's a glossary, not an in-depth explanation. I go into more detail about the plugin in later sections.

Flowcharts
++++++++++

.. mermaid::
    :align: center
    :caption: Publishing flow from the application to the :term:`broker`

    flowchart LR
        Backend(Backend) --> Broker[(Broker)]

        Plugin{{Plugin}} --> Backend

        Application[[Application]] --> Plugin

.. mermaid::
    :align: center
    :caption: Fanout flow of data from the :term:`broker` to the sockets, showing multiple plugin instances

    flowchart TD
        Broker[(Broker)]

        Broker --> Backend_1(Backend)
        Broker --> Backend_2(Backend)

        Backend_1 --> Plugin_1{{Plugin}}
        Backend_2 --> Plugin_2{{Plugin}}

        Plugin_1 --> Subscriber_1[Subscriber]
        Plugin_1 --> Subscriber_2[Subscriber]
        Plugin_1 --> Subscriber_3[Subscriber]

        Plugin_2 --> Subscriber_4[Subscriber]
        Plugin_2 --> Subscriber_5[Subscriber]
        Plugin_2 --> Subscriber_6[Subscriber]

The ``ChannelsPlugin``
----------------------

.. currentmodule:: litestar.channels.plugin

The :class:`ChannelsPlugin` acts as the central entity for managing channels and

> subscribers. It's used to publish messages, control how data is stored, manage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subscribers. It's used to publish messages, control how data is stored, and manage
```

subscribers, route handlers and configuration.

.. tip::
    The plugin makes itself available as a dependency under the ``channels`` key, which

>     means it's not necessary to import it and instead, it can be used from within route

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    means it's not necessary to import it and instead it can be used from within route
```

>     handlers or other callables within the dependency tree directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    handlers or other callables directly.
```

Author: That's an important detail though. It does not automagically get injected into *any* callables.

Configuring the channels
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

> The channels manged by the plugin can be either defined upfront, passing them to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The channels managed by the plugin can be either defined upfront, passing them to the
```

``channels`` argument, or created "on the fly" (i.e. on the first subscription to a
channel) by setting ``arbitrary_channels_allowed=True``.

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: Passing channels explicitly

    from litestar.channels import ChannelsPlugin

    channels_plugin = ChannelsPlugin(..., channels=["foo", "bar"])

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: Allowing arbitrary channels

    from litestar.channels import ChannelsPlugin

    channels_plugin = ChannelsPlugin(..., arbitrary_channels_allowed=True)

> If ``arbitrary_channels_allowed`` is not ``True``, trying to publish or subscribe to a

Reviewer: Make this a note or admonition?

channel not passed to ``channels`` will raise a :exc:`ChannelsException`.

Publishing data
+++++++++++++++

One of the core aspects of the plugin is publishing data, which is done through its
:meth:`publish <ChannelsPlugin.publish>` method:

.. code-block:: python

    channels.publish({"message": "Hello"}, "general")

> The above example will publish the data to the channel ``general``, subsequently putting

Author: Sure, but not the one we use. The method is named `publish` after all. The term "putting" is used in this context as well, but only when referring to an event stream.

it into all subscriber's :term:`event stream` to be consumed.

This method is non-blocking, even though channels and the associated
:term:`backends <backend>` are fundamentally asynchronous.

Calling ``publish`` effectively enqueues a message to be sent to the backend, from which
follows that there's no guarantee that an event will be available in the backend
immediately after this call.

Alternatively, the asynchronous :meth:`wait_published <ChannelsPlugin.wait_published>`

> method can be used, which  the internal message queue, publishing the data to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
method can be used, which the internal message queue, publishing the data to the
```

This needs attention. "Which" is not working here

> method can be used, which  the internal message queue, publishing the data to the

Author: ```suggestion
method can be used, which skips the internal message queue, publishing the data to the
```

backend directly.

.. note::

>     While calling :meth:`publish <ChannelsPlugin.publish>` does not guarantee the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Calling :meth:`publish <ChannelsPlugin.publish>` does not guarantee the
```

Author: I don't like this change in combination with the next one. It makes the sentence sound forced and chopped.

>     message is sent to the backend immediately, it will be sent there *eventually*; On

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    message will sent to the backend immediately. Rather it will be sent there *eventually*; On
```

>     shutdown, the plugin will wait for all queues to empty

Reviewer: This is a separate note

Author: I don't think so. This note talks about when messages are sent to the backend, of which this is a detail. If this is moved the notes ends in talking about the messages being sent there eventually, which then begs the question *when*.

> Managing subscriptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing Subscriptions
```

++++++++++++++++++++++

> Another core functionality of the plugin is managing subscriptions, for which two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another core functionality of the plugin is managing subscriptions, for which there are two
```

> different approaches exist:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
approaches:
```

1. Manually through the :meth:`subscribe <ChannelsPlugin.subscribe>` and

>    :meth:`unsubscribe <ChannelsPlugin.unsubscribe>` methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :meth:`unsubscribe <ChannelsPlugin.unsubscribe>` methods.
```

Author: Usual comments about periods

2. By using the :meth:`start_subscription <ChannelsPlugin.start_subscription>` context

>    manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   manager.
```

Both :meth:`subscribe <ChannelsPlugin.subscribe>` and
:meth:`start_subscription <ChannelsPlugin.start_subscription>` produce a

> :class:`Subscriber`, which can be used to interact with the streams of events subscribed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:class:`Subscriber`, which can be used to interact with the streams of events directly. 
```

Author: There is no method to interact with the stream indirectly, so this is a needless clarification.

> to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The context manager should be preferred, and using the methods directly should only be

Reviewer: Admonition? Maybe explain why as well.

Author: Fixed

done when a context manager cannot be used, e.g. when the subscription would span
different contexts.

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: Calling the subscription methods manually

    subscriber = await channels.subscribe(["foo", "bar"])
    try:
        ...  # do some stuff here
    finally:
        await channels.unsubscribe(subscriber)

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: Using the context manager

    async with channels.start_subscription(["foo", "bar"]) as subscriber:
        ...  # do some stuff here

It is also possible to unsubscribe from individual channels, which may be desirable if
subscriptions need to be managed dynamically.

.. code-block:: python

    subscriber = await channels.subscribe(["foo", "bar"])
    ...  # do some stuff here
    await channels.unsubscribe(subscriber, ["foo"])

Or, using the context manager

.. code-block:: python

    async with channels.start_subscription(["foo", "bar"]) as subscriber:
        ...  # do some stuff here
        await channels.unsubscribe(subscriber, ["foo"])

> Managing history

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing History
```

+++++++++++++++++

> Some backends support a per-channel history, keeping a certain amount of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some backends support per-channel history, keeping a certain amount of
```

:term:`events <event>` in storage. This history can then be pushed to a
:term:`subscriber`.

The plugin's :meth:`put_subscriber_history <ChannelsPlugin.put_subscriber_history>` can
be used to fetch this history and put it into a subscriber's :term:`event stream`.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/channels/put_history.py
    :language: python

.. note::

>     The publication of the history happens sequentially, one channel at a time, one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The publication of the history happens sequentially, one channel and one
```

>     event at a time. This is done to ensure correct ordering of the events and to not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    event at a time. This is done to ensure the correct ordering of events and to avoid
```

>     fill up a subscriber's backlog, resulting in dropped history entries. Should the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    filling up a subscriber's backlog, which would result in dropped history entries. Should the
```

    amount of entries exceed the maximum backlog size, the execution will wait until
    previous events have been processed.

    .. seealso::
        `Managing backpressure`

The ``Subscriber``
------------------

.. py:currentmodule:: litestar.channels.subscriber

The :class:`Subscriber` manages an individual :term:`event stream`, provided to it by

> the plugin, representing the sum of events from all channels the subscriber has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the plugin. The event stream represents the sum of events from all channels the subscriber has
```

subscribed to.

It can be considered the endpoint of all events, while the backends act as the source,

> and the plugin as a router, being responsible for supplying events gathered from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the plugin as a router - being responsible for supplying events gathered from the
```

backend into the appropriate subscriber's streams.

In addition to being an abstraction of an :term:`event stream`, the :class:`Subscriber`

> provides different methods to handle this stream:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provides different methods to interact with it:
```

Author: See previous comment. There is only one method to interact with the stream, but different ways to handle it.

:meth:`iter_events <Subscriber.iter_events>`
    An asynchronous generator, producing one event from the stream at a time, waiting
    until the next one becomes available

:meth:`start_in_background <Subscriber.start_in_background>`
    Starts a :class:`asyncio.Task` which runs in the background, consuming the

>     :term:`event stream` and invoking a provided callback with the received events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :term:`event stream` and invoking a provided callback with the received events.
```

:meth:`run_in_background <Subscriber.run_in_background>`
    A context manager, wrapping
    :meth:`start_in_background <Subscriber.start_in_background>`. Upon exit, it will
    attempt a graceful shutdown of the running task, waiting for all currently enqueued

>     events in the stream to be processed. Should the context be left with an error, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    events in the stream to be processed. If the context exits with an error, the
```

    task will be cancelled instead.

    This should be the preferred method of running the background task, since it ensures
    the task's lifetime is handled correctly

    .. tip::
        It's possible to force the task to stop immediately, by passing ``join=False`` to
        :meth:`run_in_background <Subscriber.run_in_background>`, which will
        lead to the cancellation of the task. By default this only happens when the context is
        left with an exception.

.. important::
    The :term:`events <event>` in the :term:`event streams <event stream>` are always
    bytes; When calling :meth:`ChannelsPlugin.publish`, data will be serialized before

>     being sent to the backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    being sent to the backend.
```

> Consuming the event stream

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consuming an Event Stream
```

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> There are two general methods of consuming the :term:`event stream`:

Reviewer: Three?

Author: Not really. You can either iterate over it or use a background task.

> 1. By iterating over it directly, using :meth:`iter_events <Subscriber.iter_events>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. :meth:`iter_events <Subscriber.iter_events>`, which iterates over it directly.
```

2. By using a background task,
   using :meth:`run_in_background <Subscriber.run_in_background>` or
   :meth:`start_in_background <Subscriber.start_in_background>`

Iterating over the stream directly is mostly useful if processing the events is the only
concern, since :meth:`iter_events <Subscriber.iter_events>` is effectively an infinite

> loop. For all other applications, a background task is preferable, which also iterates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
loop. For all other applications, a background task is preferable, which also iterates
```

```suggestion
loop. 

For all other applications, a background task is preferable, which also iterates
```

over the event stream, but does so in an :class:`asyncio.Task`, giving control back to
the caller immediately.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/channels/iter_stream.py
    :language: python

In the above example, the stream is used to send data to a
:class:`WebSocket <litestar.connection.WebSocket>`.

The same can be achieve by passing
:meth:`WebbSocket.send_text <litestar.connection.WebSocket.send_text>` as the callback
to :meth:`run_in_background <Subscriber.run_in_background>`. This will cause the
WebSocket's method to be invoked every time a new event becomes available in the stream,

> but gives control back to the application, providing an opportunity to perform other

Reviewer: Break this into a separate sentence

tasks, such as receiving incoming data from the socket.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/channels/run_in_background.py
    :language: python

.. important::
    Iterating over :meth:`iter_events <Subscriber.iter_events>` should be approached
    with caution when being used together with WebSockets.

    Since :exc:`WebSocketDisconnect` is only raised after the corresponding ASGI event
    has been *received*, it can result in an indefinitely suspended coroutine. This can
    happen if for example the client disconnects, but no further events are received.
    The generator will then wait for new events, but since it will never receive any,
    no ``send`` call on the WebSocket will be made, which in turn means no exception
    will be raised to break the loop.

> Managing backpressure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing Backpressure
```

---------------------

Each subscriber manages its own backlog: A queue of unprocessed :term:`events <event>`.
By default, this backlog is unlimited in size, allowing it to grow indefinitely. For
most applications, this should be no issue, but when the recipient consistently can't
process messages faster than they come in, an application might opt to handle this case.

The channels plugin provides two different strategies for managing this backpressure:

> 1. A backoff strategy, dropping newly incoming messages as long as the backlog is full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A backoff strategy, dropping newly incoming messages as long as the backlog is full.
```

2. An eviction strategy, dropping the oldest message in the backlog when a new one is

>    added while the backlog is full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   added while the backlog is full.
```

        backlog_strategy="dropleft",
    )

Backends
--------

The storing and fanout of messages is handled by a
:class:`ChannelsBackend <litestar.channels.backends.base.ChannelsBackend>`. Currently
implemented are:

:class:`MemoryChannelsBacked <.memory.MemoryChannelsBackend>`
    A basic in-memory backend, mostly useful for testing and local development, but
    still fully capable. Since it stores all data in-process, it can achieve the highest
    performance of all the backends, but at the same time is not suitable for
    applications running on multiple processes.

:class:`RedisChannelsPubSubBackend <.redis.RedisChannelsPubSubBackend>`
    A Redis based backend, using `Pub/Sub <https://redis.io/docs/manual/pubsub/>`_ to
    delivery messages. This Redis backend has a low latency and overhead and is
    generally recommended if history is not needed

:class:`RedisChannelsStreamBackend <.redis.RedisChannelsStreamBackend>`
    A redis based backend, using `streams <https://redis.io/docs/data-types/streams/>`_
    to deliver messages. It has a slightly higher latency when publishing than the
    Pub/Sub backend, but achieves the same throughput in message fanout. Recommended

>     when history is needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    when history is needed.
```

> Integrating with websocket handlers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integrating with Websocket Handlers
```

-----------------------------------

> Generating route handlers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generating Route Handlers
```
